---
title: The Accidental Evangelist
published_at: 2017-05-24T16:33:53Z
hook: Lets talk about the bad aspects of the technology we
  use as well as the good. Better information will lead to
  better decisions in the next generation of technical
  architecture.
---

In our industry, technological hype has a bad tendency to
work like a ratchet. We sing the praises of the various
systems we use, but even after using them for a while and
seeing that the hype doesn't match reality, we don't knock
them back down.

Over the last few decades we've seen big pushes for tools
like XML, Scala, PHP, MySQL, Erlang, Node, Rails, Mongo,
Meteor, Ember, Angular, React, Riak, Go, and countless
others. More recently, the industry's seen enough
saturation that fatigue has lead to a bit more skepticism,
but we can still see the same signs of of ongoing pushes,
even if somewhat more tempered (e.g. Rust, Elixir, Kotlin,
Crystal, ...).

Some of these tools have withstood the test of time and are
still fine choices for a new technology stack. On the other
hand, a good number of them are _not_. Trade offs aside,
existential problems like a pathologic lack of runtime
safety, a decaying ecosystem, or a design that leads to
burdenous operation become apparent with use, and make
their avoidance perfectly rational. Sometimes we make
mistakes, or the state of the art improves, and ideas that
we originally thought to be good hit the end of their
useful lifetime.

It's a very human thing to do to withhold criticism. There
are humans on the other end of all this technology, and
frequently they're even humans that we know and like. It's
also rarely personally helpful to speak ill of systems that
realistically speaking, you're going to married to for some
time to come.

But we should consider ramifications of staying silent --
by withholding information on the bad technology in our
stacks, we're cheating people and companies who aren't
using it yet, but may yet adopt its use. By speaking out,
you have the potential to save _millions_ of hours of
future productivity that would have otherwise been
sacrificed to the altar.

Disastrous pitfalls, vampiric operational overhead, and
chronic underdesign are never in the manual, and often not
obvious until you're already waist deep. By being on the
inside of these things, you have access to special insight
that other people can't get without fully investing
themselves at great expense.

This isn't to say that we should unduly sling mud, but
pieces that are honest, detail-oriented, thoroughly
researched, but also critical, might be the best way that
you can help your fellow builders.
