---
title: The Inaugural Issue, Portland, and Flyknit
published_at: 2017-07-15T19:48:53Z
---

It struck me recently that the details of many journeys are
lost. It's not that they're gone, but more that they don't
come up in conversation, and unwittingly vanish as they
become a story that's never told. Even those that do get
transferred are eventually sacrified to our rickety
memories. Artifacts like photos remain of course, but most
of us are hopelessly bad at perodicaly sifting through the
thousands of photos that we've accumulated throughout our
lives.

For Christmas a few years ago, my grandmother gave me one
of the best gifts that I've ever received. She presented my
brother and I each with a book of memories. She'd hunted
through her extensive photography collection and carefully
selected a few dozen photos that in aggregate told the
stories of our lives -- from the weeks after our births, to
our early family vacations, and all the way through to
proms and first cars. Each was annotated with a few witty
words from Grandma to make them meaningful.

These volumes are special. It's easy to casually pick one
up and scan through a few pages looking at random pictures
and letters. My grandmother had found the perfect
compromise in story-telling mediums -- light enough to
skim, but substantial enough to last.

## Passages & Glass (#passages-glass)

This is what I'm trying to with _Passages & Glass_ --
short, self-indulgent stories about what I've been doing,
and on some of my favorite things in products and software.

_Passages & Glass_ is also my attempt to support the indy
web. It's sent via the only universal communication medium
that we have (email) in the most open formats available
(plain text and HTML), and is my small way of pushing back
against the continued centralization of our stories in
closed platforms like Facebook and Twitter.

At any time, if you no longer want to receive it, you can
[easily unsubscribe](%unsubscribe_url%).

## Portland (#portland)

![Portland](/assets/passages/001-portland/L1010468@2x.jpg)

### Salt & Straw

![Salt & Straw](/assets/passages/001-portland/L1010474@2x.jpg)

Saw [Hideaki It≈ç][ito].

![Brewcycle](/assets/passages/001-portland/L1010517@2x.jpg)

![Waterfall](/assets/passages/001-portland/L1010633@2x.jpg)

![Waterfall](/assets/passages/001-portland/L1010739@2x.jpg)

[ito]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hideaki_It%C5%8D
