---
title: Japan
published_at: 2017-11-07T05:19:48Z
---

![Osaka](/assets/passages/002-japan/osaka@2x.jpg)

In 1992 Michael Crichton wrote _Rising Sun_. At the time
Japan was seeing a meteoric rise, moving from a post-war
reconstruction project towards becoming the most powerful
economic engine in the world. America may have been the
progenitor of TV, cars, VCRs, record players, and denim, it
was seeing its domestic market flooded with goods from
Japan that weren't just cheaper, but superior in every way
that mattered. America was feeling an existential
insecurity of its own position in the world similar to the
one that China elicits in it today.

_Rising Sun_ is premised on the murder of a young lady at
the grand opening of a new Japanese skyscraper in Los
Angeles, and follows the responding detective as he works
his way through the corporate machinations that surround
it. An excerpt:

> "If we knew what made Ishiguro behave as he did, we'd
> understand this case."
>
> "I don't understand."
>
> "It's hard for an American to see him clearly," Connor
> said. "Because in America, you think a certain amount of
> error is normal. You expect the plane to be late. You
> expect the mail to be undelivered. You expect the washing
> machine to break down. You expect things to go wrong all
> the time.
>
> "But Japan is different. Everything works in Japan. In a
> Tokyo train station, you can stand at a marked spot on
> the platform and when the train stops, the doors open
> right in front of you. Trains are on time. Bags are not
> lost. Connections are not missed. Deadlines are met.
> Things happen as planned. The Japanese are educated,
> prepared, and motivated. They get things done. There's no
> screwing around."

At the peak of Japan's run it was said that the property
under the Imperial Palace in Tokyo was worth more than the
entire state of California, but a collapsing asset bubble
in the early 90s left the country's economy stagnating for
twenty years (its so-called ["Lost Decades"][lostdecades]).
This makes the book a little dated with today's 20-20
insight into the past.

Even so, while Crichton engages in a little hyperbole for
dramatic effect, what he's stated is still more accurate
than not. Everyone's heard that all Japanese trains are on
time, but outside of Japan you assume that it's an
exaggeration. You won't know until you visit that it's
literally true -- it's not that most trains are on time,
it's that (right up to a miniscule margin of error), _all_
trains are on time, _all the time_. Transportation
infrastructure like rail isn't a little better than what
you find the US, it's two to three orders of magnitude
better.

Everyone in Japan from Shinkansen conductors, to store
clerks, to pop stars, and CEOs practices their professional
with an edged seriousness that's remarkable to see in
action. Everyone is willing to help and everything gets
done quickly and efficiently. We made a subway kiosk go out
of service by using it the wrong way. We'd flagged an
attendant who came over, returned our money, and repaired
it -- all inside about a minute. We left one Tokyo bar only
to realize that the owner had followed us into the hallway.
As we got into the elevator and punched in our floor, she
bowed deeply as we waited for the doors to close and stayed
bowed right up until the moment when they'd hidden her from
sight.

In case it's not obvious by now, I recently had the chance
to visit Japan -- and loved it. This one turned out to be a
little long for a single edition so I've split it into two,
and I'll send the second part in early 2018. As usual, you
can unsubscribe instantly [by clicking right
here][unsubscribe]. Thanks for reading!

## A world of wonders (#wonders)

Let's start with a few facts about Japan that I think every
westerner (who's never visited) will find surprising:

* Many people have heard the urban legend that if you lose
  your wallet or purse in Japan, it will be returned to
  you. It's not a myth -- even after spending just a few
  weeks there I met a fellow in Osaka who'd forgotten his
  wallet on the train. JR found it and mailed it to his
  hotel. They even called beforehand to make sure it was
  okay to open it and remove a few hundred yen in bills to
  pay for postage.
* Convenience stores (largely 7-11, Family Mart, and
  Lawson) are a cornerstone of the country's society.
  Unlike almost anywhere else on Earth, they're ubiquitous
  (even in rural areas) and serve food that's high quality
  and healthy (well, some of it anyway).
* There are vending machines everywhere and they dispense
  everything from hot drinks to fried food. They're priced
  on par with local convenience stores so people actually
  use them. Tommy Lee Jones, a figurehead for Suntory's
  Boss brand, is depicted on many of them (see below).

![Boss](/assets/passages/002-japan/boss@2x.jpg)

* There are almost no public trash cans anywhere in the
  country. If you have something to throw away, you'll need
  to pack it out until you get home or find a convenience
  store. Even despite this, Japanese cities are the
  cleanest places you'll ever see -- you'd be hard pressed
  to find a piece of litter anywhere because everyone
  follows the rules.
* Corndogs are called "American dogs" and sold at every
  convenience store. They're _delicious_ and have taken a
  spot as one of my favorite foods.
* Train conductors motion a lot with their hands and speak
  to themselves as they're driving, even when they're by
  themselves. This is called [pointing and
  calling][pointcall] and in studies has shown to reduce
  mistakes by about 85%.
* Every taxi in the country has a robotic passenger door
  that can be opened at the push of a button by its driver.

## Kanazawa (#kanazawa)

Kanazawa's a city of about half a million northwest of
Tokyo along Japan's other coast bordering the Sea of Japan.
After a brief layover in Tokyo to board a new plane, it was
our first stop.

Kanazawa's a great place to visit because it has all the
beauty and history of Japan without the overwhelming
density that you see in its major cities. Its houses were
once taxed based on the width of their street frontage,
which led to the development of picturesque streets packed
with houses that are long but narrow.

You can't walk more than a few blocks without running into
a shrine, some of which are unimaginably beautiful. These
are in place for Japan's Shinto religion, and it's common
for even otherwise very secular people to visit them a few
times a month for a quick two-minute prayer.

![Kanazawa](/assets/passages/002-japan/kanazawa@2x.jpg)

It's a wet region, and at night we'd often find ourselves
laying back listening to thunderstorms raging on outside.
Like anyone who lives with regular rain, the locals hate
it. To someone who lives in dry California, it's fantastic.

![Suzuki Museum](/assets/passages/002-japan/suzuki@2x.jpg)

### Yukitsuri (#yukitsuri)

One of Kanazawa's signature features is the Kenrokuen
Garden, considered to be one of the country's three
greatest along with sisters in Okayama and Mito. It has all
the features that you'd expect in a Japanese garden
including sculpted trees, tranquil ponds, and impressive
moss-covered stone bridges and lanterns.

![Yuki-tsuri](/assets/passages/002-japan/yuki-tsuri-1@2x.jpg)

A common sight at Kenrokuen is "Yukitsuri", a Japanese
technique for protecting the growth of trees from heavy
snowfall. Ropes are hung to lend extra support for branches
and larger ones are propped up with bamboo columns. The
extra support keeps parts of the tree upright and growing
laterally when they'd otherwise bow under the weight of
heavy, wet snow.

Yukitsuri enables growth that would be impossible and
nature, is quite pretty to look at too.

![Yuki-tsuri](/assets/passages/002-japan/yuki-tsuri-2@2x.jpg)

## The macaques of Nagano (#macaques)

Japan has its own species of macaque, often referred to as
a "snow monkey". With the exception of humans, no other
primate lives further north, or in colder weather.

We visited Jigokudani Snow Monkey Park in Nagano, an area
well known for its wild monkeys, but also for its natural
hot springs. During the cold winter the monkeys to flock to
the hot springs, where they relax in the warm water (which
in my opinion produces some of the world's great photos if
you want [Google for it][macaques]).

![Macaques](/assets/passages/002-japan/macaques@2x.jpg)

The macaques don't visit the human-accessible part of park
every day, but the park's wardens helpfully post daily
stickers on Facebook that read "monkeys!!" or "no monkeys
:(" so that you can get a feel for how often they're
visiting (they usually come).

And when they come, they come in droves. When I saw my
first monkey I focused on him and crept around carefully,
afraid that I'd scare him off. I realized later that I was
missing the forest for the trees, and that there were about
two hundred others like him a little further up the path.
It's really a personal natural experience -- I had dozens
run just a few feet from me after being there for a half
hour or so.

### Shibu Onsen (#shibu-onsen)

A little down the road from Jigokudani is a town called
Shibu Onsen. _Onsen_ (♨) is the Japanese word for a natural
hot spring. Some towns, like Shibu Onsen, that are
intrinsically linked to their hot springs that "onsen" is
right in their name.

The town has a narrow main road with nine bath houses built
along it. It's largely pedestrian-first and is a very
peaceful walk and excellent embodiment of rural Japan. Most of
the onsens don't even have reception areas; instead there
are two doors leading to men and women's changing rooms
that lead right off the street. Visitors get a master key
from the ryokan they're staying at and walk up and down the
street visiting each one clothed only in basic yukata robes
and with geta sandals clacking against the stone. It's said
to be good fortune to make it to all nine.

![Shibu Onsen](/assets/passages/002-japan/shibu-onsen@2x.jpg)

We couldn't do the usual tour because we didn't have a
place to stay overnight, but we found a small ryokan that
would let us in to use their onsens for a few hours. The
place looked about two hundred years old, but the age just
added to the character -- the history in the ancient tiles
and wood was palpable. In some cases the mineral formations
on pipes caused by years of carrying the Earth's raw water
were two inches high.

### ♨ Onsens & the art of bathing (#onsens)

The Japanese have taken advantage of their island's
volcanic nature to produce thousands of onsens based around
natural hot springs around the country. There are far more
public baths beyond just the hot water that's naturally
available in the form of the _sentō_ -- identical to
onsens except that they run on heated tap water.

Public baths are engrained in the cultural landscape of
Japan. Beyond just a practical way of getting clean,
they're also a place to go and relax, socialize, and if
you're willing to buy into a little bit of mythos -- heal.
Onsens are often attributed with particular healing powers
based on their own unique mix of naturally occurring
minerals.

![Onsen](/assets/passages/002-japan/onsen@2x.jpg)

A common way for locals to escape the bustle of Tokyo is to
make the short trip up to Hakone, known particularly for
traditional ryokans, colorful hues in the autumn, and --
onsens. There's even a Japanese TV series about a salaryman
who hates his job and skips work to visit local sentō
(_Sunshine Sento-Sake_; [available on Amazon][sunshine]).

## Lucky Yebisu (#lucky-yebisu)

During one of our last days in Japan we stumbled across the
Yebisu beer museum in Tokyo's vibrant Ebisu district (which
is itself named for the beer company) and went in. Yebisu
is named for Ebisu, the Japanese god of fishermen and luck.
He's one of the [Seven Gods of Fortune][sevengods] that
you'll find portrayed across every corner of Japan. He's
portrayed on Yebisu bottles with his fishing rod and
baskets of fish.

![Lucky Yebisu](/assets/passages/002-japan/lucky-yebisu@2x.jpg)

Here's a little Easter egg: 99%+ of Yebisu bottles look
like the one on the right. One in every few hundred looks
like the bottle on the left. Notice the difference?

If not, you're not the only one -- it's really easy to
miss. Look all the way over to the very left-hand side of
the photo and you'll see that Yebisu on the left has an
extra fish: _both_ of his baskets are full. He has two fish
while the Yebisu on the right only has one. These special
bottles are called "Lucky Yebisus" and it's a detail so
minute that almost no one will notice it and yet
simultaneously spread throughout the world. Its sole
purpose is to bring a little bit of delight to anyone in
the know.

## The iPhone X (#iphone-x)

I had doubts about the iPhone X. It's obvious to anyone
paying attention that Jony Ives' has wanted an end-to-end
display on Apple phones for years, and given their recent
track record I wouldn't put it past them to discard a good
technology (TouchID) for a bad one (FaceID) just to make
that happen.

![iPhone X](/assets/passages/002-japan/iphone-x@2x.jpg)

I'm happy to say that I was wrong. iOS 11 had made my
trusty iPhone 6 painfully slow, so I upgraded. FaceID works
great -- it's not perfect, but it doesn't have anymore
problems than TouchID did (which performed very poorly if
your hands were wet or cold and didn't work at all through
gloves). It's OLED screen is beautiful. The camera can get
take some amazing shots. It's _fast_.

The removal of the home button isn't just an aesthetic win
(in that it removed the iPhone's "chin"), but one for
usability as well. Swiping up to go home is as fast as the
home button was, and swiping up and to the left to
multi-task is _faster_ than the old double-click.

## The Hauser (#hauser)

I can't stay away from cool bags. Recently I picked up
Mission Workshop's [Hauser][hauser], a weatherproof pack
that has the most striking backpack design that I've ever
seen.

![The Hauser](/assets/passages/002-japan/hauser@2x.jpg)

Technically it's a hydration pack, but it's got enough
space to fit everything you need as long as you're willing
to travel light. The main compartment is narrow, but it'll
fit a stuffable jacket, a change of clothes, and/or a water
bottle. The back compartment is _just_ big enough to fit a
13" version of the latest generation of MacBook Pro.
There's enough side compartments for all the small tools,
power bricks, and Apple dongles that you need to have on
you.

[It's the only bag that I took with me][hauserkumano] for a
multi-day hike (albeit with nightly stops that were
sheltered) along the Kumano Kodo in Japan. At 14L it was a
bit of a stretch space-wise, but it worked.

## Taking coffee seriously (#coffee)

I've owned a [Chemex][chemex] for years, but have always
opted to eyeball the coffee I'm making -- putting roughly
the right amount of beans through the grinder and filling
the water to where I think is right.

I recently invested in a couple new tools. The first is a
kitchen scale that I can use to get all quantities exactly
right. The second is a long-stemmed kettle with a twist: it
has a small thermometer on the top that I can use to hit
the target the ideal 96° C.

![Coffee](/assets/passages/002-japan/coffee@2x.jpg)

I came to a few realizations really fast. I hadn't been
using enough coffee beans, I'd been adding too much water,
and I'd been letting the water cool for way too long (it
turns out that boiling water left to cool on the counter
really only takes a few seconds to fall to target
temperature).

I was impressed by the usability features built into a $15
kitchen scale these days. My favorite is that it'll "tare"
(that's when you zero the scale to account for the weight
of an empty container) automatically as soon as it's turned
on with whatever's already on it. As long as you put a
container on it first, it's operable by pressing only one
button one time.

Here's my Chemex process:

* 42g coffee ground to the consistency of Kosher salt.
* Bloom by pouring 150g of water over ~45s (water at 96°
  C).
* Finish by pouring on another 450g water for a total of
  600g.

## A few other publications (#publications)

If you're interested in reading a little more in-depth on
technical subjects, since the last edition of _Passages_ I
published two more articles on idempotency. The article
published [earlier this year on Stripe's
blog][stripeidempotency] is a decent primer. [Using atomic
transactions to power an idempotent API][httptransactions]
goes a little further to talk about how to implement an
idempotent API whose correctness is guaranteed through
`SERIALIZABLE` transactions in Postgres. [Implementing
Stripe-like idempotency keys in Postgres][idempotencykeys]
covers the more difficult case where the API has to make
its own mutation by calling out across a network to foreign
services.

[Redis streams and the unified log][redisstreams]
introduces the new streams data structure in Redis and how
it can be used to build log-based architecture in software.
In many stacks streams will be a good Kafka alternative
that's easier to install and cheaper to run.

Thanks for making it this far! I hope this newsletter will
serve as your periodic reminder to get in touch -- just hit
"reply".

[chemex]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chemex_Coffeemaker
[hauser]: https://missionworkshop.com/products/the-hauser-hydration-backpack
[hauserkumano]: https://twitter.com/brandur/status/932760090704150528
[httptransactions]: https://brandur.org/http-transactions
[idempotencykeys]: https://brandur.org/idempotency-keys
[lostdecades]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lost_Decade_(Japan)
[macaques]: https://www.google.com/search?tbm=isch&q=macques+hot+spring&oq=macques+hot+spring
[pointcall]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pointing_and_calling
[redisstreams]: https://brandur.org/redis-streams
[sevengods]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Gods_of_Fortune
[stripeidempotency]: https://stripe.com/blog/idempotency
[sunshine]: https://www.amazon.com/Sunshine-Sento-Sake-Season-1-Subbed/dp/B01M9D7RN0
[unsubscribe]: %unsubscribe_url%
