---
title: Headspace
published_at: 2017-05-07T16:57:10Z
hook: TODO
---

We held a wellness week at Stripe recently, and along with
a few local activities, the company gave all employees
yearlong access to Headspace, a popular meditation app.
Being relevant to my interests, I registered and tried it
out.

I'm ten days into use now and Headspace is working -- I'm
on my longest streak of successive days meditating ever
(although a modest achievement by most standards). The mild
gamification that it uses to give me the length of my
current streak acts as just enough encouragement to lock
for 10 minutes every day. The guided meditations lessons
don't get old because there's a new one every day, but
they're also done of a good job of making sure that in each
session the material covers common ground to help lock in
the core themes.

## More mindful notifications wanted

I've almost hit the 365 day mark for calorie counting with
My Fitness Pal, and I'm hoping that Headspace might be
enough to let me pick up another good habit. This will be a
little harder with Headspace though because because its
simplistic notification system just sends you a push
notification once a day at a fixed time whether you've
already meditated already or not. Contrast this to My
Fitness Pal which tracks whether you've added information
for the day, and tries to send you a lifeline later in the
evening if it notices that you're about to miss it.

## Pricing

I also couldn't help but notice the service's price. It has
a subscription system that costs $12.95/month and which can
be made a little cheaper with a commitment to a longer
term. I have no doubt that a calmer mind is worth that much
money, but in the world of meditation, there are a lot of
free alternatives that net you almost the same effect and
are of arguably better quality [1]. There's also the matter
of the content being mostly static, and for good reason;
the best practices in meditation aren't changing all that
much month to month.

Still, I can't hold it against anyone who's trying to
monetize these days, so all power to them given that they
seem to be making it work. We could use a few more examples
of successful businesses that can show the rest of the
world how to pull out of free fall as the app economy
crashes towards towards Earth in an accelerating race to
the bottom.

## Healthy habits

Meditation is one of the places that I can spend time and
not regret a minute that I've put toward it. It's a
significant help in improving focus, reducing anxiety, and
clarifying ideas. I know that I want to do more of it, and
the only question is how to build the habit.

The best methods I know of are to start with modest goals,
like ten minute daily practice, and to have technology
assist through gamification and reminders; normally
annoying anti-patterns of the mobile age, but helpful when
it comes to building good habits. I look forward to
Headspace helping out here.

[1] For example, Sam Harris has two guided meditation
    sessions on Sound Cloud ([9 minutes][9-min] and [26
    minutes][26-min]) that are quite good.

[9-min]: https://soundcloud.com/samharrisorg/mindfulness-meditation-9
[26-min]: https://soundcloud.com/samharrisorg/mindfulness-meditation-26
