---
title: AirPods
published_at: 2017-03-29T14:44:33Z
image: /assets/fragments/airpods/vista.jpg
twitter_image: true
hook: I'm happy to be cheering from the bleachers as Apple
  makes their first home run in years.
---

Apple's had a bad few years. Financially, things are great,
but product innovation has not only slowed to a crawl, but
in cases like the Touch Bar, has stopped, reversed, and is
chugging along at full steam in the wrong direction. I'd
planned to ignore the release of the AirPods, but some
personal anecdotes from a few early adopters were so
strong, that I caved and bought a pair.

Boy was I wrong. The AirPods are easily the best product
that Apple has released in recent memory.

My biggest fear going in is that like the other wireless
technologies that we know and love, they would occasionally
just ... not work. Having a call drop is annoying, but
earphones that can't consistently play music is a recipe
for frustration so total that it borders on agony. But now
I'm a few weeks of use in, and that just doesn't seem to
happen; the AirPods' connection is so seamless that you
forget you're not attached with a wire.

And speaking of wires, the future is bright. Not having
a Gordian knot to untangle every time your take your
earphones out of pocket, and not getting caught on anything
you walk by that's protruding ever-so-slightly is freeing,
and you start to appreciate it immediately. Getting them in
and out of your ears is fast and easy.

It's the minor touches in usability that make the AirPods a
great product. If you take one out of your ear playback is
paused automatically, and resumes when you put it back in.
The included charging case is every so slightly magnetic so
that when you slide your AirPods into it, they're sucked in
with a satisfying click. Both ears have a built-in
microphone, and it only takes a second to throw one of them
in for a phone call for a result that's as natural as if
you were talking to the other party in person.

Their major weakness is total lack of of sound insulation.
If you're anywhere but the most serene environments,
whatever you're listening to will disappear into the
background noise, which vastly diminishes their functional
usefulness. A street with even light traffic, a gym that's
playing background music, or even voices in a crowded room
are all enough to make listening to anything over AirPods
an unfulfilling experience. I would have thought that Apple
employees using their own products would eventually push
development in the right direction, but years of
disappointment on this front suggest that it's not the
case. Cupertino must be a very quiet place.

Despite that, they're still great and a pleasure to use
every time I take them out. Apple: fewer Touch Bars and
dongles please; more of this.
