---
title: Sharing with iCloud Drive and iBooks
published_at: 2017-04-01T16:24:18Z
hook: Using iCloud Drive and iBooks to synchronize books
  and PDFs between all your devices.
---

A chore that I often find myself doing is moving PDFs from
a computer to my iPad. It sounds like it should be simple,
and relatively speaking it is, but it takes a surprising
number of steps and time. I'd copy the PDF to my Dropbox
folder, open Dropbox on iOS, find and download the file,
and finally export it to iBooks (still has the best PDF
reading experience).

On iOS that requires somewhere in the neighbood of twenty
taps and 3-4 minutes for one file. Both the download from
Dropbox and the export are very slow, and iOS' export menus
are a perfect example of a true UI hellscape (see my rant
on [bad UIs in iOS and other modern systems](/interfaces)).
I wanted a better way.

It turns out that Apple provide have a near perfect
facility for what I'm trying to do; it's just not obvious
to find or configure. By enabling iCloud Drive in iBooks on
all your devices, you can have it globally synchronize
content, and it works well.

The trick is that not only is there no visual indication in
iBooks that iCloud Drive is on and working, there's no
indication that it's even an option to do so. The only way
to configure it is to go in through iCloud in your system
preferences, enable iBooks there, and then go back to
iBooks and click through a special iCloud splash pane that
appears once and then never again. It's nowhere to be found
in iBooks' configuration.

This is a perfect example of Apple taking user
infantilization too far. If things are working for you,
then it's all great, but if not, the whole system is so
opaque that debugging anything yourself or trying to divine
a solution are next to impossible. Your only recourse is
Google and hoping that someone's already suggested a good
answer (and in Apple forums, that's rarely the case).

The good news is that after it's all setup, iCloud/iBooks
do an admirable job of synchronizing content across your
devices. I now drag a PDF onto iBooks on my computer, and
tap to open it on my iPad, which is more or less a perfect
workflow.

Here are some screenshots of what the iCloud preference
panes should look like on Mac OS and iOS (note that iBooks
is checked in both cases).

![Mac OS](/assets/fragments/apple-sharing/icloud-macos.png)

![iOS](/assets/fragments/apple-sharing/icloud-ios.png)

