---
title: The City That Tried to Buy Itself
published_at: 2017-09-11T05:19:56Z
hook: Thoughts on governments protecting tenants by buying
  buildings and raging against the law of supply and
  demand.
---

Berlin [recently announced that it was blocking the sale of
a Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg tenement][buy] and instead
buying the building itself. The action is allowed thanks to
a right of pre-emption that came in as part of a national
"neighborhood protection" law.

It's a populist move that's not sustainable. Berlin's an
up-and-coming city that real estate speculators in Germany
and around the globe (this one was from Luxembourg) are
veritably drooling over. If it tries to step in and buy
every building whose ownership is going to turn over in the
next decade, it'll bankrupt itself in the blink of an eye.
These acts of charity also have consequences -- a lucky few
tenants get access to permanently subsidized rents, but a
municipality's budget is a zero-sum game. Everyone else
suffers from the loss in civic services that the money
would have otherwise paid for.

And yet, the move is also indicative of a deeply-set
problem that's engulfing every rich society on the planet.
It seems natural to think of real estate as an asset class
that's susceptible to the laws of supply and demand, but
unlike stocks and bonds, shelter is a basic need that every
person on Earth should have access to. Cheap money (~zero
percent interest rates), poorly performing investments
elsewhere, and a ubiquitous housing crunch have the
well-moneyed racing to drop everything they can into
rapidly appreciating urban environments. The rich eat the
poor, the old eat the young, and everyone but the capital
class is forced further out into the periphery with
three-hour commutes and a proportional loss of opportunity.

Housing crises aren't going to be solved by small time
measures like governments buying buildings to prop up a few
dozens tenants. A real solution is going to necessitate
change so big that it would be challenging to think about
from our perspective today. A combination of huge tax
penalties on anything beyond primary residences, foreign
buyer tax cranked to draconian levels, strictly enforced
occupancy tax, and anti-AirBnB legislation are all going to
be needed to counteract the overwhelming market forces at
work. It's worth considering even more extreme measures too
-- like making real estate investment flat out illegal.

The one key point in the eulogy of the human race will be
its inability to solve big problems. Just like climate
change and world peace, this is one that's probably going
to prove too big for us, and over the span of centuries is
reasonably likely to lead to civilization-ending levels of
social unrest.

On a slightly less somber note -- what's been happening in
Vancouver recently is showing promise in both the measures
implemented (foreign purchase and occupancy taxes) and the
speed which they went in, so there is some hope. Berlin,
London, San Francisco, New York, etc. should all be
following suit as quickly as they can draw up the
legislation.

[buy]: https://www.citylab.com/equity/2017/08/berlin-rent-control-neighborhood-protection/536325/
