---
title: Mindfulness
published_at: 2017-11-24T00:54:13Z
hook: On the importance of slowing down in the age of
  Slack and social media.
---

While relaxing in an Onsen the other day, my mind wandered
to what I wanted to do later in the day. I'd leave the
hotel, go and find something to eat and a frosty Asahi,
come back to the room for a writing session, and just
before bed, return to the Onsen for a late-night session. I
found myself idly looking forward to food and beer, but
even more so to that next trip to the Onsen.

Suddenly, the absurdity of the thought hit me like a ton of
bricks: I was _sitting in an Onsen_ looking forward to the
_next time_ I'd be able to sit in an Onsen. It was hard to
imagine a more pathological example of cognitive
degeneracy.

I'd like to say that this kind of thinking is an uncommon,
but it's not. Like many people, most of the time my mind is
a frothing cauldron of erratic thoughts -- constantly
boiling over and rarely focused on anything useful. Some
moments in the day are worse than others; I can often get
in periods of extended focus during early mornings when the
world is calm. After extended multi-tasking, concentrating
on anything is next to impossible.

My feeling is that the age of Slack and social media is
making this state of continuous distraction ever stickier.
Even if it's just juggling work and a few open conversation
windows, multi-tasking is ubiquitous and ever-present,
making serious periods of work increasingly scarce. Lately,
I've been trying to counteract it with _mindfulness
meditation_.

[_Mindfulness_][mindfulness] is the process of bringing
one's attention into the present moment. During meditation,
it's practiced with techniques like "noting", where
fleeting thoughts are briefly acknowledged before being
allowed to pass, and "body scanning", where the state of
each part of the body is considered as attention moves from
head to toe. Meditation has deep roots in Buddhism, but is
just as useful for secularists, with the goal being better
mental well-being by reducing depression and anxiety, and
increasing happiness and relaxation.

These days it's a savior for my frazzled mind. I commit one
dedicated slot every day, but have also found that it's a
useful habit to pick up for the countless idle moments in
between. While sitting on a bus, waiting in a line at the
store, or watching the status bar on CI, a few slow breaths
and a moment of concentration does wonders for recovering
some semblance of serenity. That trip later to the Onsen
will be great, but the present moment should feel good too.
My goal is to slow down and live it.

[mindfulness]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mindfulness
