---
title: The state of messaging
published_at: 2017-01-17T15:33:00Z
hook: It's 2017, and the state of instant messaging is in
  worse shape than ever before.
---

I recently had a friend switch from iPhone to Android, and
it was an unpleasant wakeup call to see just how subdivided
the world of instant messaging is today. Because we were in
the Valley, and the overwhelming number of developers here
seem to own iPhones, we'd been able to get away up to that
point with a group iMessage chat. There's no excuse for
iMessage's horrible lock-in, but it tends to work well,
produces a conspicuous "double vibrate" on phones (so
people know they got a message), and has a pretty good
desktop client just as long as you're also on Mac.

The list of new possibilities is almost without end. SMS is
the classic lowest common denominator, but it doesn't have
good group support, is generally horrible, and doesn't work
with anything that's not a phone. Google Hangouts (Or is it
Allo? Previously also GTalk.) and Facebook Messenger are
also top possibilities, but depend on people being on each
service, and are painful to use on a desktop. Based off its
client support alone, Slack is also a contender.

Somewhat incredibly, because it came from a tiny upstart
compared to the other networks, WhatsApp may still be the
best option. It's interoperable, has a great desktop
client, and its attempts to keep the network secure are
laudable.

Twenty years ago in 1997, you had one option: ICQ. It had
its share of problems, but everyone was on it, and the
protocol was simple enough to cultivate a thriving
ecosystem of clients. As we hurdle into the future, deep
fractures have had the effect of making things broadly just
worse, even if we do now have faster networks and more
emoji.

The fact that SMS still exists and that telcos can still
gouge for its use is a testament to how broken things are.
Apple and Google would do the world a huge favor by getting
together and authoring an open standard (preferably one
that's simpler than XMPP) that any phone could dial into.
New features would be harder to add, but given that even
twenty years later instant messaging is still just text and
basic media, it's easily a worthwhile trade off.
