---
title: "Unsubscribe: The noisy death of email marketing"
published_at: 2017-08-27T16:26:50Z
hook: How increasing volume and diminishingly quality will
  lead to the irrelevance of the email marketing industry.
---

A few years ago I created an address specifically to
receive offers by email. Whenever I bought something
online, I'd enter my newsletter address in the email field,
and leave the "Yes, I'd like to receive promotions"
checkbox ticked. I expected the send volume to be high
enough to overpower other messages, hence the new address,
and indeed it was. Subscriptions ramped up quickly.

The premise of the experiment was that oftentimes merchants
really do have great deals, and for a few in particular you
really need to know about them. If you buy something at
Banana Republic with anything less than a 40% discount
(which appears roughly every other week) or walk into a
Bed, Bath & Beyond without a 20% coupon code, you've been
had. In the beginning, it mostly worked as intended. I saw
a lot of content and took advantage of more than a few
bargains.

But somewhere along the way, the dull background noise
crescendoed into a deafening roar. I was getting somewhere
on the order of 50 messages every single day. Some were
interesting, but the vast majority were not. The value
proposition of combing this inbox dropped to something
vanishingly small. Eventually, I stopped reading it.

It's not that deals weren't being sent, but that they were
being drowned out by everything else. Companies would send
a message every day whether or not they had anything
worthwhile to say, and the worst offenders up to two or
three. The overwhelming majority were pinnacles of
non-deals; for example the industry-wide favorite of
apparel companies: 20% off clearance items [1].

Ironically, email marketers are going to kill their own
industry through a classic tragedy of the commons. By
racing to send more volume with correspondingly less
quality, they're training their subscribers that nothing
they send has value. Even if many people don't explicitly
hit the "unsubscribe" button, it's only a matter of time
before they're not going to be reading those messages.

Today, I've cut my subscriptions back to practically none.
I haven't missed them yet.

[1] And available ~365 days a year.
