---
title: Japan
published_at: 2017-12-24T06:07:33Z
---

![Osaka](/assets/passages/002-japan/osaka@2x.jpg)

In 1992 Michael Crichton wrote [_Rising Sun_][risingsun].
At the time Japan was seeing a meteoric rise, moving from a
post-war reconstruction project towards becoming the most
powerful economic engine in the world. America invented TV,
cars, film, printers, and denim, but was seeing its
domestic market flooded with Japanese versions that weren't
just cheaper, but better in every way that mattered. At the
time, the US was feeling an existential insecurity similar
to the one China elicits in it today.

Here's an excerpt from the book that's always stuck with
me:

> "If we knew what made Ishiguro behave as he did, we'd
> understand this case."
>
> "I don't understand."
>
> "It's hard for an American to see him clearly," Connor
> said. "Because in America, you think a certain amount of
> error is normal. You expect the plane to be late. You
> expect the mail to be undelivered. You expect the washing
> machine to break down. You expect things to go wrong all
> the time.
>
> "But Japan is different. Everything works in Japan. In a
> Tokyo train station, you can stand at a marked spot on
> the platform and when the train stops, the doors open
> right in front of you. Trains are on time. Bags are not
> lost. Connections are not missed. Deadlines are met.
> Things happen as planned. The Japanese are educated,
> prepared, and motivated. They get things done. There's no
> screwing around."

At the peak of Japan's dominance it was said that the
property under the Imperial Palace in Tokyo was worth more
than the entire state of California. But instead of the
country's economy shooting to the moon, a collapsing asset
bubble in the early 90s left it stagnating for twenty years
(the so-called ["Lost Decades"][lostdecades]). With the
20-20 insight into the past that we have today, _Rising
Sun_'s cautionary theme feels dated.

Even so, the passage is still more accurate than not.
Everyone's heard that trains in Japan are on time, but you
don't see until you visit that it's literally true. Not
only that most trains are on time, but that right up to a
miniscule margin of error, _all_ trains are on time, _all
the time_. Rail infrastructure and technology isn't a
little better than what you find the states, it's three
orders of magnitude better.

Everyone in Japan from Shinkansen conductors to sushi chefs
and store clerks to CEOs practice their professions with
disciplined seriousness. A subway kiosk goes out of service
and an attendant is flagged over and has it fixed in
minutes. You walk out of a bar and the owner follows you
into the hallway, and bows deeply until the elevator's
doors hide her from sight. A train leaves the station 20
seconds early and its operator [issues a formal
apology][twentysec].

## Hello, again (#hello)

Oh yeah, I went to Japan, and for my money, it's the most
interesting country on Earth. Not because its trains are
fast (although you do just have to _love_ the train), but
because of its amazing beauty, long history, unique culture
and technology, and friendly people.

I had the privilege of visiting a variety of its sights --
everything from dense urban jungles to beautiful wild
areas. This letter turned out to be a little long, so it's
coming out in two parts, with the next in early 2018.

As usual, you can unsubscribe instantly [by clicking
here][unsubscribe], but I hope you don't. Thanks for
reading!

## Stranger than fiction (#fiction)

Let's start with a few facts about Japan that I think every
westerner (who's never visited) will find surprising:

* Many have heard the urban legend that if you lose your
  wallet in Japan, it'll be returned to you. It's true. I
  first heard the story from a teacher in elementary school
  who'd left her purse on a park bench. She came back and
  retrieved it the next day.
    
    In a bar in Osaka, I met a guy who'd forgotten his
    wallet on the train just the week before. He filed a
    report, JR found it, and they mailed it to his hotel.
    They called beforehand to make sure it was okay to open
    it and remove a few hundred yen in bills to pay for
    postage.
* Convenience stores (largely 7-11, Family Mart, and
  Lawson) are a cornerstone of society. Unlike almost
  anywhere else on Earth, they're ubiquitous even in rural
  areas, and serve great food like onigiri and pork buns.
* There are vending machines everywhere and they dispense
  everything from hot drinks to fried food. Prices are the
  same as local convenience stores so there's no reason to
  avoid them. Tommy Lee Jones, a figurehead for Suntory's
  Boss brand, stares back from many of them throughout the
  country.

![Boss](/assets/passages/002-japan/boss@2x.jpg)

* There are no public trash cans. If you have something to
  throw away, you pack it out until you get home or come
  across a convenience store. You'd think this would lead
  to runaway littering, but Japanese cities are the
  cleanest places you'll ever find. Everyone follows the
  rules.
* Corndogs are called "American dogs" and sold at every
  convenience store along tiny condiment packets that
  dispense the perfect amount of ketchup and mustard.
  They're _delicious_, and now rank amongst my favorite
  foods.
* Train conductors speak and motion with their hands as
  they're driving (gesturing symbolically to the track
  ahead, lights they pass, their timetable, etc.). They do
  it even when they're alone. The technique is called
  [pointing and calling][pointcall] and has been shown to
  reduce mistakes by about 85%.
* Every taxi in the country has a robotic passenger door
  that can be opened at the push of a button (and it's not
  a sliding door like a minivan, but one that swings
  outward like a normal car's).

## Kanazawa (#kanazawa)

Kanazawa's a city of about half a million parked on the
coast northwest of Tokyo along the Sea of Japan. After a
brief layover at Narita to board a new plane, it was our
first stop.

Kanazawa's a great place to visit because it has the beauty
and history of Japan without the density of its major
metropolises (which can be a little overwhelming for
visitors). Houses in the city were once taxed based on the
width of their street frontage, which led to the
development of picturesque streets packed with houses that
are narrow in the front, but which stretch deeply into
their block.

Every few minutes you stumble across a shrine as you're
exploring, and most of them are inconceivably beautiful
(there's one depicted below). They're part of Japan's
Shinto religion, and it's common for the otherwise secular
locals to visit them for a quick few minutes of prayer.

![Kanazawa](/assets/passages/002-japan/kanazawa@2x.jpg)

It's a wet region, and at night we'd often find ourselves
laying back listening to thunderstorms raging outside. Like
anyone who lives with regular rain, the locals hate it. To
someone who lives in dry California, it's fantastic.

![Suzuki Museum](/assets/passages/002-japan/suzuki@2x.jpg)

### Yukitsuri (#yukitsuri)

One of Kanazawa's signature features is the Kenrokuen
Garden, considered to be one of the "Three Great Gardens of
Japan" along with its sisters in Okayama and Mito. It has
all the hallmarks that you'd expect in a Japanese garden
including sculpted trees, tranquil ponds, and moss-covered
stone bridges and lanterns.

![Yuki-tsuri](/assets/passages/002-japan/yuki-tsuri-1@2x.jpg)

A common sight at Kenrokuen is "Yukitsuri", a Japanese
technique for protecting the growth of trees from heavy
snowfall. Ropes are hung to lend extra support for branches
and larger ones are propped up with bamboo columns. The
scaffolding keeps parts of the tree upright and growing
laterally that would otherwise bow under the weight of
heavy, wet snow that comes every winter.

Yukitsuri fosters a form of sprawling growth that would be
impossible in nature. It's pretty neat to look at too.

![Yuki-tsuri](/assets/passages/002-japan/yuki-tsuri-2@2x.jpg)

## The macaques of Nagano (#macaques)

Japan has its own species of macaque, colloquially referred
to as a "snow monkey". With the exception of humans, no
other primate lives further north, or in colder weather.

We visited _Jigokudani Snow Monkey Park_ in Nagano, an area
well known for its wild monkeys and its natural hot
springs. During the cold winter the monkeys to flock to the
hot springs, where they relax in the warm water. (And in my
opinion, make some of the world's greatest models. [Google
it][macaques].)

![Macaques](/assets/passages/002-japan/macaques@2x.jpg)

The macaques don't make it to the human-accessible part of
park every day, but its wardens helpfully post daily
updates to Facebook that read "monkeys!!" or "no monkeys
:(" so that you can get a feel for how often they visit
(they usually do).

When they come, they come in droves. As I came up the trail
and saw my first macaque, I crept around him carefully,
afraid that I'd scare him off. A moment I realized later
that I was missing the forest for the trees -- a little
further up the path were about two hundred others like him,
screaming at each other and scrambling chaotically in every
direction, often just inches from your feet. There are very
few parks in the world where you'll get such a wild
experience this personal.

### Shibu Onsen (#shibu-onsen)

A little down the road from Jigokudani is a village called
Shibu Onsen that's an excellent embodiment of rural Japan.
_Onsen_ (♨) is the Japanese word for a natural hot spring.
Some places, like Shibu Onsen, are so intrinsically linked
to their hot springs that they have "onsen" right in the
name.

The village has a narrow main road with nine bath houses
built along it. Most of them don't have reception areas;
instead there are two doors leading to the men's and
women's baths that lead right off the street. Visitors are
given a master key by the _ryokan_ (a traditional Japanese
inn) where they're staying and travel up and down the
street visiting each one. Most are clothed only in _yukata_
robes; _geta_ sandals clacking loudly against the stone as
they make their unhurried journeys. It's said to be good
fortune to make it to all nine of the baths in one day.

![Shibu Onsen](/assets/passages/002-japan/shibu-onsen@2x.jpg)

We couldn't do the normal tour because we didn't have a
place to stay overnight, but we found a small ryokan that
let us in to use their onsens (plural, there were about
five in the building) for a few hours. The place looked to
be about two hundred years old, but with age comes
character, and the history was palpable in every ancient
tile and softened plank of wood. The mineral formations on
some pipes were two inches high -- salty buildup caused by
decades of carrying the raw yield of the Earth.

### ♨ Onsens & the art of bathing (#onsens)

The Japanese have taken advantage of their island's
volcanic nature to produce thousands of onsens around
around the country, and amazingly, they're just one of
the types of public bath in Japan. The other is the
_sentō_, identical to their naturally occurring cousins,
but not restricted by geography -- they're filled with
simple heated tap water instead of from a natural well.

Public bathing is engrained in the cultural landscape of
Japan. Beyond just a way of getting clean, it's also a way
to go relax, socialize, and if you're willing to buy into a
little bit of folklore -- heal. Onsens are often attributed
with certain healing powers based on their location and
unique mix of naturally occurring minerals.

![Onsen](/assets/passages/002-japan/onsen@2x.jpg)

A common way for locals to escape the bustle of Tokyo is to
make the short trip up to Hakone, known particularly for
its traditional ryokans, colorful hues in the autumn, and
of course -- onsens. Japanese TV even carries a series
about a salaryman who hates his job and skips work to visit
local sentōs ([_Sunshine Sento-Sake_][sunshine]).

## Lucky Yebisu (#lucky-yebisu)

During one of our last days in Japan we stumbled across the
Yebisu beer museum in Tokyo's vibrant Ebisu district
(itself named for the beer company). "Yebisu" is derived
from "Ebisu", the Japanese god of fishermen and luck. He's
one of the [Seven Gods of Fortune][sevengods] that you'll
find portrayed in every corner of Japan, and is shown on
bottles of Yebisu with his fishing rod and baskets of fish.

![Lucky Yebisu](/assets/passages/002-japan/lucky-yebisu@2x.jpg)

Here's one of the most minute Easter eggs you'll ever come
across: 99%+ of Yebisu bottles look like the one on the
right. One in every few hundred looks like the bottle on
the left. Notice the difference?

If not, you're not the only one -- you practically need a
microscope to see it.

Look all the way over to the very left-hand side of the
photo and you'll see that Yebisu on the left has an extra
fish. _Both_ of his baskets are full while the Yebisu on
the right only has a fish in one of his baskets. These
special bottles are called "Lucky Yebisus" and their extra
detail is totally insignificant, and yet spread across the
world. It serves no useful purpose other than to bring a
little bit of delight into the day of one of the handful of
people who come across a Lucky Yebisu and know its secret
(and now, you might be one of them).

## The iPhone X (#iphone-x)

I had my doubts about the iPhone X. Anyone paying attention
knows that Jony Ives has wanted an end-to-end display on
iPhones for years, and especially given the "form over
function" maxim that Apple's adopted since Steve's death,
he'd do whatever it takes to get one. Jettisoning a good
and reliable technology (TouchID) for a new one with some
novelty factor (FaceID) and a prettier screen? No problem.

![iPhone X](/assets/passages/002-japan/iphone-x@2x.jpg)

But I was wrong to doubt it. iOS 11 rendered my trusty
iPhone 6 a lame brick operating at glacial speeds, so I
upgraded to the X. FaceID works great -- it's not perfect,
but it has no more problems than TouchID did (which
performed very poorly if your hands were wet or cold and
didn't work at all through gloves), and the OLED screen
_really is_ pretty. Its camera takes some amazing shots.
The new chip is _fast_.

Best of all, the removal of the home button isn't just an
aesthetic win (it removed the iPhone's "chin"), but one for
usability as well. Swiping up to go home is as fast and
reliable as the home button was, but better yet, swiping up
and to the left to multi-task is _faster_ than the old
double-click. The home button was overloaded, and the new
swipe gestures are a big improvement.

## The Hauser (#hauser)

I can't stay away from cool bags. I picked up Mission
Workshop's new [Hauser][hauser], a weatherproof pack with a
striking design.

![The Hauser](/assets/passages/002-japan/hauser@2x.jpg)

Technically it's a hydration pack, but if you travel light,
it'll hold everything you need. The main compartment is
narrow, but it'll fit a stuffable jacket, change of
clothes, and water bottle. The back compartment is _just_
big enough to fit the 13" version of the latest generation
MacBook Pro. There's enough side compartments for all the
cards, small tools, and Apple dongles that you need to have
on you.

[It's the only bag that I took with me][hauserkumano] for a
multi-day hike (albeit with nightly stops that were
sheltered) along the Kumano Kodo in Japan (more on this to
come in issue 003). At 14L it was a bit of a stretch
space-wise, but it worked.

## The perfect cup (#coffee)

I've owned a [Chemex][chemex] for years, but have always
opted to eyeball my quantities -- putting roughly the right
amount of beans through the grinder, and filling the water
to where I think is right.

I recently invested in a couple new tools. The first is a
kitchen scale that I can use to get all quantities exactly
right. The second is a long-stemmed coffee kettle with a
twist: it has a small thermometer on the top that I can use
to hit the ideal 96° C.

![Coffee](/assets/passages/002-japan/coffee@2x.jpg)

They helped me to a few realizations fast. I hadn't been
using enough beans, I'd been adding _too much_ water, and
I'd been letting the water cool for way too long (it turns
out that boiling water left to cool on the counter really
only takes a few seconds to fall to 96).

The usability features built into a $15 kitchen scale these
days are impressive. Mine will "tare" (that's when its
weight reading is zeroed to account for the weight of an
empty container) automatically when it's turned on. As long
as there's a container on it first, it's fully operable by
pressing only one button one time -- a tiny bit of
ingenuity in gastronomic technology.

Here's my Chemex recipe:

* 42g coffee ground to the consistency of Kosher salt.
* Bloom by pouring 150g of water over ~45s (water at 96°
  C).
* Finish by pouring on another 450g water for a total of
  600g.

## A few other publications (#publications)

If you're interested in reading a little more in-depth on
technical subjects, since the last edition of _Passages_ I
published two more articles on idempotency. The article
published [earlier this year on Stripe's
blog][stripeidempotency] is a decent primer. [Using atomic
transactions to power an idempotent API][httptransactions]
goes a little further to talk about how to implement an
idempotent API whose correctness is guaranteed through the
`SERIALIZABLE` isolation level in Postgres. [Implementing
Stripe-like idempotency keys in Postgres][idempotencykeys]
covers the more difficult case where the API has to make
its own mutation by calling out across a network to foreign
services.

[Redis streams and the unified log][redisstreams]
introduces the new streams data structure in Redis, and how
it can be used to build log-based architecture in software.
In many stacks streams will make a good Kafka alternative
that's easier to install and cheaper to run.

Thanks for making it this far! I hope this newsletter will
serve as your periodic reminder to get in touch. Just hit
"reply".

[chemex]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chemex_Coffeemaker
[hauser]: https://missionworkshop.com/products/the-hauser-hydration-backpack
[hauserkumano]: https://twitter.com/brandur/status/932760090704150528
[httptransactions]: https://brandur.org/http-transactions
[idempotencykeys]: https://brandur.org/idempotency-keys
[lostdecades]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lost_Decade_(Japan)
[macaques]: https://www.google.com/search?tbm=isch&q=macques+hot+spring&oq=macques+hot+spring
[pointcall]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pointing_and_calling
[redisstreams]: https://brandur.org/redis-streams
[risingsun]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rising_Sun_(novel)
[sevengods]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Gods_of_Fortune
[stripeidempotency]: https://stripe.com/blog/idempotency
[sunshine]: https://www.amazon.com/Sunshine-Sento-Sake-Season-1-Subbed/dp/B01M9D7RN0
[twentysec]: https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/11/16/564558279/after-tokyo-commuter-train-leaves-20-seconds-early-company-apologizes
[unsubscribe]: %unsubscribe_url%
